Hi there.
This is De La Rue and welcome back.
So we looked at how to access classes in packages.
Now let's see how we can create our own packages.
Now in the previous lesson, we have seen this import statement.
The package name is Java.
And this belongs to the Java API.
But since we now want to see how we can create our own packages, let's pick a different example.
Since my company's name is Semantic Square, I might want to create my classes in packages that include
the name Semantic Square.
So I might want all my package names to start with.
The text column dot semantics where.
Typically package names have at least two or three components that are separated by dots.
Components here are calm and semantic squared.
Let's still not bother ourselves about the structure of the package name.
That is why it has multiple components or what those components signify.
We will discuss that later.
Now, if you recall, it was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter that packages are nothing but
directories on the file system.
So it means that we need to create some directories corresponding to the package name.
Now, if a package name involves a single component, then the package is basically a single directory
and the directory name would be the package name itself.
So if the package name is basics, then you would create a directory called basics.
But if the package name involves multiple components, then the package would correspond to a nested
directory structure as shown here.
That is, if the package name is complete semantic squared basics, then each component in this package
name corresponds to a directory in the nested directory structure.
Now, if our basics Democrats were to be in this kind of a package, then we need to create such a directory
structure and place basics demo in the last directory as shown here.
So that's one thing that we need to do.
Creating the directory structure.
And another thing to do is to have a package statement in the class.
On the package statement involves the keyword package followed by the package name.
And here is the package statement for our example.
And the package statement must be the first statement in the class.
If not, we get a compiler error.
Even import statements should follow the packet statement.
And here is an example of how our basic demo class would look like.
So packet statement is followed by any import statements which are then followed by the class definition.
Also note that a sauce file can have only one package statement.
So basically to put our class in a package, we need to ensure that there is a matching directory structure
and then place the class in the last directory.
And we need to also put a package statement at the top of the class.
Now, an important effect of placing a class in a package is that once the class is compiled, the package
name becomes part of the class name.
And due to this, you can no longer execute the class using its simple name.
You need to use the fully qualified name of the class, which will include the package name as shown
here.
So it would be package name followed by DOT, followed by the class name.
Now let's go ahead and see what we just discussed in action.
Okay.
This demo is going to be a bit lengthy demo because we are going to discuss lot of details like setting
up class parts.
So do pay a lot of attention, but I'll make sure that everything is explained in a very clear and a
very systematic way.
So here we have basic demo.
And for this particular demo, let's make it part of a package and let's call the package name as calm
semantics squared dot six.
So we know that the package statement has to be there and it has to be the first statement, and so
it needs to be at the top of the class.
Okay.
That's the package statement.
Now, we also know that we need to have a matching directory structure on the file system, and then
we need to place this particular class within that directory structure.
Now, you may have noticed that we already created this particular directory structure in our course,
right?
When we started our writing, our programs, we created this directory structure.
So we just need to go into the directory structure and we need to compile this particular class.
So this is the directory structure.
We had the Java in-depth and within that we had the source directory as RC.
And within that we have this directory structure, the nested directory structure which matches the
package name.
So we already did that.
Now, if this was not there, we would have created this directory structure.
So this particular class, we know that it is already here, so let's just compile it.
Compiles.
Fine.
Let's run it.
So it says could not find or load main class basics demo.
That's because, as we discussed earlier in the slides, when we compile this file which has such a
package statement, the package name would become part of the class name.
So we cannot directly execute the simple class name.
This is called as the simple class name.
So we said that we need to give the fully qualified name, which includes the package name followed
by DOT, followed by the class name.
So let's do that.
Now, it still says that it could not find the class.
The reason for that is the Java interpreter is looking for this directory structure right within the
base six directory.
So it is expecting that there would be a directory called com here and within that semantic square and
within that base six and within the basics demo class.
But that's not the case.
This directory structure is right here.
It is in the IRC directory.
So Java interpreter is trying to is looking for this directory structure.
So for that, we need to move down here to Z.
So let's do that.
And now if we execute it, it's going to execute one of the methods.
So this is one of the methods in the file labeled Continue.
So it works fine, but here there is something happening implicitly under the hoods.
So what the Java interpreter is doing here is.
So the first thing that it does is it checks if the environment variable class path has been set or
not.
So in the second chapter we have looked at the class path environment variable.
And if you recall we said that a class path environment variable is specific to Java and as the name
implies, class path.
It is used for locating class files like the DOT class files and it is used by both the Java compiler
as well as the Java interpreter that is the JVM.
So that's the first thing that it is going to do, whether there is a class path or not.
Now just keep in mind class path and path are different.
Path is a generic thing.
Path is also an environment variable and path is useful for running this executables itself.
Right.
We discussed it very well.
So if you want to execute this Java command or the Java Command, then those executables should be in
the path they should be located from one of the paths in the path environment variable.
But cross path is just specific to Java and it is for locating class files by both the compiler as well
as the Java interpreter.
In this particular example, the Java interpreter is trying to locate this particular class file basics
demo dot class.
Now if you want to, you can actually refer to that particular lecture because it has some details about
class path.
So the first thing that happens is it checks if the class path is there or not and if it is not there,
let's say if the class path has not been set, then what it does is the Java interpreter well so the
command is being executed in the search directory, so it will check if within this directory the RC
where the command is being executed, if it has this directory structure.
So by default it is going to check if RC directory has this particular directory structure which would
have the class basics demo.
So it would do that in the current directory where the Java command is being executed.
That is when the class path is not there.
But in my case, the class path has been set.
So let me show you my class path.
So all I would do is execute this command called set class path.
This is my class part and class part includes different parts here.
So this is the command.
Now, this is on my windows machine.
Now, if you are using a unique space machine like Ubuntu or Mac OS, then the command would be here.
It is.
It would be a core space dollar and within braces you would have class path.
Now you can look at the resources section.
I have a document which would include these commands and perhaps some other instructions to.
So here in my case, the class part is there.
So what the Java interpreter is going to do is it's going to look at each of these parts.
Now, here are windows.
The parts are separated by semicolons.
Like in this case there is a dot followed by semicolon.
But on Unix based systems it would be a column.
So it will look at it will scan this class path value, which is this whole thing.
And it will check it will check each of these paths and it will see if it can locate this class in any
of those paths.
So it will look for this directory structure in each of these paths until it finds it.
Now here dot implies current path, which means that the location where we are executing the command,
so it has the dot here.
So in my particular case, so it will look at this and it will see a dot and it is going to check if
within this current directory where we are executing the command.
If this directory structure is present and if basic demo is part of that directory structure.
So that's how it is going to locate.
Now, if you are not using class path, if class path has not been set, then also it looks in the current
directory.
In my case, it's because of the class path having this dot.
That's the reason why it is able to execute it.
Now, let me just show it to you by removing this class path.
So one way we can do that is we'll just set.
Glass path equal to.
So if you do that, the class path is cleared, which means that the class path is not there.
And this works only for this particular session of the terminal.
And on Windows or on UNIX systems, you would say export class path equal to you know, it would just
be like this, something like this.
So let me just say set class path now.
So it says that environment, variable class path not defined because we have set we have set it to
empty.
So now let me run it.
So now we do not have the class part.
And that's only for this session.
If if I open a new terminal, then we can still see the session.
So let me execute it.
And as you can see, it works fine.
So first, it's going to see if the class path is there or not.
If it's not there, it works just like in this case.
But if the class path is there, then it checks, if any of the paths within that class path would have
this directory structure.
So with DOT, we have seen now that DOT is going to work only if I am executing this command from here,
from RC because RC has this directory structure.
Now let's say if I want to execute this particular command successfully from anywhere on my machine,
then I have to set the class path.
Tell a RC.
So let me let's also do that.
So let me open.
A new terminal.
Here it is.
So let me just.
Copy and paste this thing.
So as you can see, it says not found.
The class file is not found.
So now we need to set.
The class part and it should have that particular directory.
So instead of using said class path, let me just show it to you.
Let us set it permanently.
So I have also shown that in that lecture, in the in the second chapter set, how we can set the class
part or even part that was also shown in one of the lectures.
So we just going on windows, we just go into.
The control panel and you can go into system.
It opens the system properties here.
Click on advanced system settings and under advanced tab, click on environment variables and here we
have class path so we can.
If it is not there, you would create new and you would add it.
But if it is there you will just say edit so this is a variable name and at the very end let me add
the new path.
Okay.
So that's the one say och, och and och, and let me create this in a new directory so you can also
copy this one more time.
So they let me open a new terminal because the change that we just made will not be reflected in that
particular terminal.
So now let me execute this and you can see it works.
So I'm in my home directory here and it works from here and it would work from anywhere now.
So let me just say set class path and you can see that it is added at the end.
So that's what you would do if you want to set it permanently so that it would be it would work across
all sessions, so you would have to set it there.
And that particular lecture also shows how it can in the second chapter, also shows how it can be done
on a mac.
And the process would be very similar on Linux to.
So that's that.
So we created a package.
The basic demo was part is made part of a package now.
Now let's go ahead and create another class and let's import that.
So let me show you that.
So I have this a bit of code here.
Now let's create.
So we have calm, semantic square and basics, and that's where the basics demo is.
Now let's create a new package, which would be calm, Semantic Square and basics test.
So in Semantic Square Directory we will add a new directory called Basics Test, and within that we
will add a new class.
And from that class, we are going to use this basic demo class.
And also in the basics demo class I added this new method called Foo here.
So we will just invoke this particular method from that new class and this is the new class here.
So it would be part of this package called Basics Test and we are importing one ArrayList.
So this is from the Java Library, a class from the Java library, and we are importing the basics demo
class which is in the basics.
So we are saying import of this.
So package name comes first, then the import, then the class definition.
And here we are saying we are creating an instance of basics demo and we are invoking the method foo.
So first thing is I need to create that directory.
So let me go here into Semantic Square here it would be basic test.
All right, so now let's.
Save this candy to move into basic test.
And it's called basics demo test.
Now, let me show you something here.
We are going to demonstrate something else.
Now we have this class part.
Let me set this class path.
Too empty, which means that we are removing the class path.
Now let me try to compile this particular class.
So this basics demo test.
Let me copy the directory.
Here.
Let me go into that directory.
So I'm inside basics test and now I want to compile that class.
And the class part has also been removed.
I'll say, Jack.
You know, when I am saying basics demo test java.
It is giving to errors.
It says that it cannot import basics demo.
So on here.
Also we are instantiating it.
So at both of these places it's saying that it cannot locate this class files.
That's because we have removed this directory structure, this particular path.
In fact, we removed the entire class path so it is unable to.
So when we when it encounters this import statement, so it is trying to compile this Java file, but
when it is trying to compile, it encounters this statement called import of this and it is unable to
locate it in the class path.
So in our case, there is no class path.
Right.
We did not have the class path.
So it will look in the current directory whether this directory structure is in the current directory,
current directory being basics test and it's not there.
Now let's also even if we have a class path, let's say set class path.
Equal to something.
Let's say there is this folder called D2.
Even if I have this, it is not going to work because D2 does not have this particular directory structure.
It is only inside Java, in-depth and RC.
So if that is there then it would work because it will be able to find this class file the basics demo
class within that directory within RC because it has the directory structure.
So but you can see that it does not happen for the ArrayList.
That's because our list belongs to the Java Library.
So for the to locate the classes in the Java Library, it does not make use of the class path.
But for anything else, like the user defined classes, like the one which we wrote, or sometimes we
may download some third party libraries, Java libraries, and we may use it some open source libraries.
So those have to go into the class path.
So class path is essentially for locating class files, and those class files are user defined class
files.
If it is Java library, then there is no problem.
It does not.
The class path does not come into play.
So we need to set this.
So let me just set it like this.
Let me just say set.
Last part, actually.
So we have seen.
Two ways to set class path, right?
One is using the class path and the other one from the system properties.
Right, to set it permanently.
Now there is one other way to do it and let's take this opportunity to do that so you can actually do
this Java and I'll say hyphen c, p, c, p stands for class path or you can have class path two and
then space.
So it could be hyphen C, P or hyphen class path.
Any of them is fine and we will have our path.
So it will be.
In depth slash CRC and this particular file which is basics demo test.
Okay.
It says basics demo is not public.
So let me just go into basics demo.
So the basics demo class does not have the public access modifier.
So if you want to access something in a different package that it needs to have, the public access
modifier and access modifiers will be discussed later.
So this is all that is needed.
But I might have to compile that.
So let me just compile that.
So instead of going into that directory now, let me just say com we can also compile from here in this
way.
So this is my other command prompt.
The first one.
So we can also compile from here, but we need to give the correct path like this.
Here it is now.
Now it is compiled and it has the public modifier here.
It said.
Now I'm going to compile my basics.
Demo test.
Let's do it.
Now it compiles fine because we are specifying the class path.
So this doing it this way, it means that it only works for the particular command.
So if you use that class path, it would work for the entire session in the terminal.
But if you set it this way, it will only work for this particular command itself.
So as soon as the command is executed, the class path will not apply anymore.
And if you want to set it permanently, we already know that.
So you would do it in the system properties.
So that's it.
So that's what I wanted to demonstrate here.
So now we have we are able to see that the class path is used by both compiler as well as the Java interpreter.
So we started off looking at how it is used by Java interpreter.
Now in the Java Sea, when we are using the compiler, it will not have a problem locating this because
this is being specified here like the Dart Java file.
But if this Java file uses another class and that particular class has to be part of class path, so
it was using a class from the another package, the basics package.
So that's why that particular class has to be in the in the class path.
Similarly, if we are using any other classes from a third party library, then all of those classes
have to be on the class path.
So that's that.
Now let's also look at something called as sub packages.
It's a very simple concept.
Let me quickly go over that.
So here it is.
So this is the Java API and here we have the packages.
Now here if I scroll down, I have this java tutorial and java dot dot com current.
Here.
So some so we know that a package is used for meaningfully organizing classes.
Right.
Because we have a lot of classes now within a single package.
Also, sometimes we may have too many classes and some of the classes might be might be useful for performing
some specialized functions.
Groups of classes.
In that case, you can you can further group those classes into sub packages.
For instance, here, Java is a package in the Java library which has all utility classes.
So if I click on that, we can see them here, all utility classes that are specific, that represent
data structures, and we will look at them later.
Then there is this package called Java Concurrent, which also has utility classes, but which are specific
to concurrency, which is nothing but multithreading.
Similarly, we have all of these different kinds of sub packages.
Now when we say sub package, sub package, it just means that there is this directory structure for
Java.
And within that, when we say concurrent is a sub package, there would be a directory called concurrent
and within that it would be that particular sub package will have all of the classes specific to Java
concurrent.
Just don't think that this Java dot concurrent is another directory structure within the util package,
within the util directory.
It's not like that.
And when we are importing, if we want to import something from Java util a class from just from Java
or not from java concurrent we would say import Java.
Now if you want to import something from Java utility concurrent a class from that, you would have
to have that separately.
You would say Java concurrent dot computable future because Computable Future is a class in this particular
package.
So that's how it is.
Just don't don't think that if you want to access all these classes in the concurrent, just don't think
that you can do something like Java dot.
Import java dot util dot all, dot all.
And don't assume that this is going to work.
It's not going to work.
Just don't assume that it would import all the classes in all of the packages.
That's not going to work.
So this would import all classes in util.
Now if you want to import something from concurrent java concurrent, you would have to have.
Explicitly.
You need to specify the class name or you need to say star to import all of the classes in this package.
So that's how it is.
And the util directory here will have a directory called concurrent and it will have this.
Similarly in our basic demo, we have the basics here folder.
Now let's say if we want to create a subdirectory here, a sub package called sub, then you would create
something like this as sub.
Let's say it is a sub package and you would put any classes into this sub package, into this particular
sub package.
So it will be common semantic square .6. sub.
That's the package statement.
And if you want to use any of those classes, then you would say import com some dot semantics .6. sub
dot the class name or dot star for importing everything.
So that's with that.
And one last thing I want to show here is so we have this thing called basics.
Now we have all of these classes, if you want to compile all of these classes like the student student
test and all all at once, then you can simply do this.
You will have this and you can just say star dot java.
So it's.
Something like this.
So, for instance, let me just do it one more time by going into that directory.
So that's it.
And it would compile all of them.
So far we were only compiling one class at a time, so as you can see, it has created all the class
files.
So that's the thing.
And I will also add a short note about this Java Star Java.
So you can also look at that.
It's not important, but I'm just going to add something in the resources section.
So that's the class path.
And just keep in mind that this whole thing that we discussed, the class path and all, so it is really
useful when you're dealing with packages and when we are doing it this way on the command prompt.
But when we switch over to ID like eclipse, the ID will not make use of the class path.
It will take care of all of these things that we discussed internally.
So that's when we switch over to ID.
But now since we are not doing using an ID, so this is how it would work and ID would also do something
similar.
But it's just that we don't have to explicitly set the class path in order to access classes from other
packages.
So that's about it.
And I hope that you have enjoyed learning about creating packages and I hope it is very clear also and
that's about it.
Thank you and happy coding.